Question
Explain how indexes work in MongoDB and why they reduce read query time. Write the command to create a compound index on {customerId: 1, status: 1}. Then evaluate the trade-off: under what conditions does adding an index hurt performance, and under what conditions is it clearly worth the cost?

Answer
How Indexes Work in MongoDB
An index is a special data structure that stores the values of selected fields along with references to the corresponding documents. Instead of scanning every document in a collection, MongoDB uses the index to quickly locate matching documents.

Without an index, MongoDB performs a collection scan (COLLSCAN), checking every document. With an index, it performs an index scan (IXSCAN), which is much faster.
Why Indexes Reduce Read Query Time
Indexes improve read performance because they:

Allow MongoDB to locate matching documents quickly.
Reduce the number of documents that need to be examined.

Improve query performance on large collections.
Speed up filtering, sorting, and searching operations.

Create a Compound Index
db.orders.createIndex(
    {
        customerId: 1,
        status: 1
    }
)

Explanation:
customerId: 1 → Creates an ascending index on customerId.
status: 1 → Creates an ascending index on status.
Together, they form a compound index that optimizes queries filtering by both fields.

Trade-offs of Adding an Index
When an Index Can Hurt Performance

Inserts become slower because MongoDB must update the index whenever a new document is inserted.
Updates and deletes may also take longer since the index must be maintained.

Additional disk space is required to store the index.
Too many indexes increase memory usage and database maintenance.
When an Index Is Worth the Cost

Adding an index is beneficial when:
The collection contains a large number of documents (e.g., 500,000+).
Queries on customerId and status are executed frequently.
Fast search performance is more important than slightly slower writes.
The application requires quick response times for users.